Metabolic
Jan.XX,2021
PR Office

Development of artificial intelligence for the prediction of transcription factors

An artificial intelligence that predicts transcription factors only from the protein sequences was developed

A joint research team of KAIST and UCSD has developed an artificial intelligence, DeepTFactor, that predicts transcription factors from protein sequences. This computational system will serve as a useful tool for the understanding the regulatory systems of organisms.

A transcription factor is a protein that specifically binds to DNA sequences to control the transcription initiation. Analyzing transcriptional regulation enables understanding how organisms control gene expression in response to genetic or environmental changes. In this regard, finding the transcription factor of an organism is the first step in the analysis of the transcriptional regulatory system of an organism. Previously, transcription factors have been predicted by analyzing sequence homology with already characterized transcription factors or by data driven approaches such as machine learning. Conventional machine learning models require a rigorous feature selection process that relies on the domain expertise such as calculating the physicochemical properties of molecules or analyzing the homology of biological sequences. Meanwhile, deep learning can inherently learn latent features for the specific task. 

A join research team comprised of Gi Bae Kim, Distinguished Professor Sang Yup Lee of the Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering at KAIST and Ye Gao, Professor Bernhard O. Palsson of the Department of Biochemical Engineering at UCSD reported a deep learning-based tool for the prediction of transcription factors. Their research paper “DeepTFactor: A deep learning-based tool for the prediction of transcription factors” was published online in PNAS on January XX, 2021.

This research reports the development of DeepTFactor, a deep learning-based tool, that predicts whether a given protein sequence is a transcription factor using three parallel convolutional neural networks. The joint research team predicted 332 transcription factors of Escherichia coli K-12 MG1655 using DeepTFactor, and the performance of DeepTFactor by experimentally confirming the genome-wide binding sites of three predicted transcription factors (YqhC, YiaU, and YahB). The joint research team further used a saliency method to understand the reasoning process of DeepTFactor. Through this, it was confirmed that even though information on the DNA binding domains of the transcription factor was not explicitly given in the training process, DeepTFactor implicitly learned and used them for prediction. Unlike previous transcription factor prediction tools that were developed only for protein sequences of specific organisms, DeepTFactor is expected to be used in the analysis of transcription systems of all organisms with high performance.



Distinguished Professor Sang Yup Lee said, “DeepTFactor can be used to discover unknown transcription factors from numerous protein sequences that have not yet been characterized. It is expected that DeepTFactor will serve as a basic tool for analyzing regulatory systems of organisms of interest.”

# # #

Source:
Gi Bae Kim, Ye Gao, Bernhard O. Palsson, and Sang Yup Lee. DeepTFactor: A deep learning-based tool for the prediction of transcription factors. PNAS.

This work was supported by the Technology Development Program to Solve Climate Changes on Systems Metabolic Engineering for Biorefineries (NRF-2012M1A2A2026556 and NRF-2012M1A2A2026557) from the Ministry of Science and ICT through the National Research Foundation (NRF) of Korea.

For further information: Sang Yup Lee, Distinguished Professor of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, KAIST (leesy@kaist.ac.kr, Tel: +82-42-350-3930)



 

Figure: The network architecture of DeepTFactor. An input protein sequence is processed by three parallel subnetworks.

